---
layout: page
title: CV
tagline: Pekka Nikander
group: navigation
---
## Profile

Dr. Pekka Nikander has over 30 years software development
expertise. In 1980 he wrote his first program while still in high
school, five years later patching live UNIX kernel to fix bugs. In
1988 he founded Nixu, today a leading computer and network security
consultant company in Finland, driving it for over 10 years, followed
by another 10 years at various leadership roles at Ericsson Research.

During the time at Ericsson he grew to be an internationally
recognised expert in Internet architecture, with special attention to
security, privacy, mobility, economic, and implementation aspects. He
has a strong background in UNIX, all levels of programming from FPGAs
and system programming to compiler design and graphical user
interfaces, and computer and communications security. In early 1990s,
he spend a few years focusing on user interface aspects, creating a
user centric perspective that has remained active since then. From
1996 until 2006 he was active in Internet standardisation, and served
at the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) from March 2005 to February
2006. From 2007 until 2010 his work focused on the future of the
Internet architecture, with special attention to socio-economic,
implementation, scalability, and high performance aspects.

In March 2011 he joined Senseg, a leading haptics startup, taking the
responsibility for the software architecture. He built Senseg's
software team and processes from the ground up, establishing extreme
programming (XP) and continuous integration and testing (CIT) as the
main practises. With his team, he implemented the Senseg software
architecture, iterating in three major rounds, each time adding
significant functionality.

Pekka is first and foremost a generalist. He has more than 10 years of
experience, both at personal and at group-leadership level, on
architecting, designing, and implementing secure and scalable
distributed and decentralised systems, including protocol stacks. He
has written some half a million lines of code, mostly in C and Java
but also in a dozen or so other languages, including Verilog, various
assemblers, C++, JavaScript, Python, Ruby, SmallTalk, Scheme, and
Common Lisp. The platforms range from the Stanford NetFPGA through
Atmel microcontrollers, various Unix kernels and the iPhone, to the
LLVM compiler toolkit and system dynamics modelling.

In addition to the technical skills, Pekka has had a leadership role
for more than 20 years, first at Nixu and then at Ericsson.  While he
has never enjoyed formal management positions, he tends to lead people
with his own example and initiative. He enjoys solving technically
"impossible" challenges in small groups, aiming for the marine corps
maxim "the impossible we do at once, miracles take a bit longer!"

At the other end of the spectrum, Pekka has some experience in deep
organisational development, using methods such as World Cafe,
Openspace and Theory U, which aim at being able to reveal, understand
and change the deep landscape of organisations.

Pekka has authored or co-authored over 70 refereed scientific
articles, and is the inventor or a co-inventor in some 20 priority
patents.

## Experience

<dl>
  <dt>Chief Software Architect, Senseg, 2011-present</dt>

  <dd>Creation of the software architecture and software team from the
  ground up.</dd>

  <dt>Expert, Ericsson Research, 2010-2011</dt>

  <dd>Corporate-wide responsibility for inter-networking security,
  working at the interface between Ericsson Research and the business
  units.</dd>

  <dt>Chief Scientist, Ericsson Research Nomadiclab, 2000-2010</dt>

  <dd>Research on open communications technology and security, e.g.,
  information-centric networking, trust management, mobile
  communications, decentralised authorisation, decentralised service
  platforms, high performance communication protocols, and high level
  synthesis of networking hardware.</dd>

  <dt>Senior Visiting Research Scientist, HIIT, 2003-2009</dt>
  <dd>Research on Host Identity Protocol (HIP), authorisation
  management and trust formation, and micro-economic incentives in
  communications security.</dd>

  <dt>Member, Internet Architecture Board, 2005-2006</dt> <dd>One of
  the 12 members of the IAB.  The IAB responsibilities include
  architectural oversight of Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
  activities, Internet Standards Process oversight and appeal, and the
  appointment of the RFC Editor. The IAB is also responsible for the
  management of the Internet protocol parameter registries.</dd>

  <dt>Adjunct Professor (docent), Helsinki University of Technology, 2001-2006</dt>

  <dd>Docent on Distributed Systems Security at the Telecommunications
  Software and Multimedia Laboratory. Courses on Network Application
  Frameworks, Extreme Programming, and Distributed Systems
  Security. </dd>

  <dt>Professor (acting), Helsinki University of Technology, 1999-2000</dt>

  <dd>Acting Professor of Cryptology at the Telecommunications
  Software and Multimedia Laboratory. Courses on Object Oriented
  programming, Network Application Frameworks, and Computer
  Security. Research on distributed systems security, object oriented
  operating systems, and ad hoc networking.</dd>

  <dt>Research Manager, Ericsson Research Nomadiclab, 1998-1999</dt>

  <dd>Manager of Ericsson Research NomadicLab. Research on
  communications technology and security.</dd>

  <dt>Assistant Professor, Helsinki University of Technology, 1997-1998</dt>
  <dd>Research and teaching on distributed systems security and cryptographic protocols.</dd>

  <dt>Partner and Chairman of the Board, Nixu Oy (Helsinki, Finland), 1993-1998</dt>

  <dd>Nixu is a small consultancy company with about 100 employees,
  specialised in international consultancy on Internet systems
  management and security, acting in Near East and Nordic Europe,
  major customers including the state of Saudi Arabia, The Finnish
  Parliament, Finnish Ministry of Finance, Finnish Prime Minister's
  Office, Finnish Defence Forces, TeliaSonera, Nokia, and Ericsson.</dd>
  <dt>Founder and Managing Director, Nixu Oy (Helsinki, Finland), 1988-1993</dt>

  <dd>The founder and the first Managing Director. Built up the
  company and hired first half a dozen of employees. Major customers
  in this early era included Sonera, Sun Microsystems, and Finnish
  Defence Forces. </dd>
</dl>

## Education

* Helsinki University of Technology, Doctor in Technology (Computer Security), 1999.
* Helsinki University of Technology, Licentiate in Technology (Security protocols), 1997.
* Helsinki University of Technology, Master of Science (User interfaces), 1992.

## Skills

Internationally recognised top level knowledge and skills, with more
than 10 years of full-time working experience, in data communication
architectures, Internet standardisation, computer and communications
security, and computer programming. Good knowledge and skills, with 3
years or more of full-time working experience, in user interfaces and
human-computer interaction. Good skills, with one year or more of
full-time working experience, in compiler design and implementation,
operating systems design and implementation, and high level hardware
synthesis.

Finnish (mother tongue), English (C2 - fluent), Swedish (C1 - very good knowledge), German (A2 - basic).

## Selected refereed publications

* Pekka Nikander, Andrei Gurtov, and Thomas R. Henderson, "Host
  Identity Protocol (HIP): Connectivity, Mobility, Multi-Homing,
  Security, and Privacy over IPv4 and IPv6 Networks," IEEE
  Communications Surveys and Tutorials, Volume 12 Issue 2,
  pp. 186-204, April 2010.

* Petri Jokela, Andras Zahemszky, Christian Esteve Rothernberg, Somaya
  Arianfar, and Pekka Nikander, "LIPSIN: Line Speed Publish/Subscribe
  Inter-Networking," SIGCOMM 2009, Barcelona, August 17-21, 2009.

* Tuomas Aura, Pekka Nikander, and Gonzalo Camarillo, "Effects of
  Mobility and Multihoming on Transport-Layer Security," IEEE
  Symposium on Security and Privacy, Berkeley/Oakland, California, May
  9-12, 2004, IEEE Computer Society.

* Pekka Nikander, Jukka Ylitalo, and Jorma Wall, "Integrating
  Security, Mobility, and Multi-Homing in a HIP Way," Network and
  Distributed Systems Security Symposium (NDSS'03), February 6-7,
  2003, San Diego, CA, pp. 87-99, Internet Society.

* Jari Arkko and Pekka Nikander, "How to Authenticate Unknown
  Principals without Trusted Parties," Security Protocols, 10th
  International Workshop, Cambridge, UK, April 16-19, 2002.

* Pekka Nikander, "An Operating System in Java for the Lego Mindstroms
  RCX Microcontroller," USENIX Annual Technical Conference, June
  18-23, 2000, San Diego, USENIX Association, Lake Forest, CA. This
  paper received the Freenix Track Best Paper Award.

## Selected priority patents

* EP1698197, Authentication in a communication network, 2003.

* EP1629653, Secure traffic redirection in a mobile communication system, 2003.

* EP0848361/EP0917327, Method and system for performing electronic money transactions, 1996.

## Books

* Pekka Nikander, Tapio Peltonen, and Lea Viljanen, "Internet
  tietoturva" (Internet Security), Suomen ATK-kustannus Oy, ESPOO,
  Finland, 1996, 223 pages, ISBN 951-762-377-1.
